

This a model from the article:  
** Minimum criteria for DNA damage-induced phase advances in circadian rhythms. **   
Hong CI, Zámborszky J, Csikász-Nagy A. _PLoS Comput Biol. _2009
May;5(5):e1000384. [19424508](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19424508),  
**Abstract:**   
Robust oscillatory behaviors are common features of circadian and cell cycle
rhythms. These cyclic processes, however, behave distinctively in terms of
their periods and phases in response to external influences such as light,
temperature, nutrients, etc. Nevertheless, several links have been found
between these two oscillators. Cell division cycles gated by the circadian
clock have been observed since the late 1950s. On the other hand, ionizing
radiation (IR) treatments cause cells to undergo a DNA damage response, which
leads to phase shifts (mostly advances) in circadian rhythms. Circadian gating
of the cell cycle can be attributed to the cell cycle inhibitor kinase Wee1
(which is regulated by the heterodimeric circadian clock transcription factor,
BMAL1/CLK), and possibly in conjunction with other cell cycle components that
are known to be regulated by the circadian clock (i.e., c-Myc and cyclin D1).
It has also been shown that DNA damage-induced activation of the cell cycle
regulator, Chk2, leads to phosphorylation and destruction of a circadian clock
component (i.e., PER1 in Mus or FRQ in Neurospora crassa). However, the
molecular mechanism underlying how DNA damage causes predominantly phase
advances in the circadian clock remains unknown. In order to address this
question, we employ mathematical modeling to simulate different phase response
curves (PRCs) from either dexamethasone (Dex) or IR treatment experiments. Dex
is known to synchronize circadian rhythms in cell culture and may generate
both phase advances and delays. We observe unique phase responses with minimum
delays of the circadian clock upon DNA damage when two criteria are met: (1)
existence of an autocatalytic positive feedback mechanism in addition to the
time-delayed negative feedback loop in the clock system and (2) Chk2-dependent
phosphorylation and degradation of PERs that are not bound to BMAL1/CLK.

The original xpp file of the model is available as a supplement of the article
([Text S1](http://www.ploscompbiol.org/article/fetchSingleRepresentation.actio
n?uri=info:doi/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000384.s002)).

This model originates from BioModels Database: A Database of Annotated
Published Models. It is copyright (c) 2005-2010 The BioModels Team.  
For more information see the [terms of
use](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/legal.html).  
To cite BioModels Database, please use [ Le Novère N., Bornstein B., Broicher
A., Courtot M., Donizelli M., Dharuri H., Li L., Sauro H., Schilstra M.,
Shapiro B., Snoep J.L., Hucka M. (2006) BioModels Database: A Free,
Centralized Database of Curated, Published, Quantitative Kinetic Models of
Biochemical and Cellular Systems Nucleic Acids Res., 34: D689-D691.](http://ww
w.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?tool=pubmed&pubmedid=16381960)

